#introduction

a programming system called lisp (for list processor) has been
developed for the ibm 704 computer by the artificial intelligence
group at m.i.t. the system was designed to facilitate experiments with
a proposed system called the advice taker, whereby a machine could be
instructed to handle declarative as well as imperative sentences and
could exhibit ``common sense'' in carrying out its instructions. the
original proposal [1] for the advice taker was made in november
1958. the main requirement was a programming system for manipulating
expressions representing formalized declarative and imperative
sentences so that the advice taker system could make deductions.

in this article, we first describe a formalism for defining functions
recursively. we believe this formalism has advantages both as a
programming language and as a vehicle for developing a theory of
computation. next, we describe s-expressions and s-functions, give
some examples, and then describe the universal s-function $apply$
which plays the theoretical role of a universal turing machine and the
practical role of an interpreter. then we describe the representation
of s-expressions in the memory of the ibm 704 by list structures
similar to those used by newell, shaw and simon [2], and the
representation of s-functions by program. then we mention the main
features of the lisp programming system for the ibm 704. next comes
another way of describing computations with symbolic expressions, and
finally we give a recursive function interpretation of flow charts.

ADDED THIS LINE

we hope to describe some of the symbolic computations for which lisp
has been used in another paper, and also to give elsewhere some
applications of our recursive function formalism to mathematical logic
and to the problem of mechanical theorem proving.')

THIS LINE IS ALSO ADDITIONAL

# functions and function definitions we shall need a number of
mathematical ideas and notations concerning functions in general. most
of the ideas are well known, but the notion of conditional expression
is believed to be new2, and the use of conditional expressions permits
functions to be defined recursively in a new and convenient way.
a. partial functions. a partial function is a function that is defined
only on part of its domain. partial functions necessarily arise when
functions are defined by computations because for some values of the
arguments the computation defining the value of the function may not
terminate. however, some of our elementary functions will be defined
as partial functions.  b. propositional expressions and predicates. a
propositional expression is an expression whose possible values are
$t$ (for truth) and $f$ (for falsity). we shall assume that the reader
is familiar with the propositional connectives $\land$ (``and''',
$\lor$ (``or''', and $\lnot$ (``not'''. typical propositional
expressions are:



\begin{displaymath}x < y\end{displaymath}


\begin{displaymath}(x < y) \land (b = c)\end{displaymath}

x is prime

a predicate is a function whose range consists of the truth values t
and f.  c. conditional expressions. the dependence of truth values on
the values of quantities of other kinds is expressed in mathematics by
predicates, and the dependence of truth values on other truth values
by logical connectives. however, the notations for expressing
symbolically the dependence of quantities of other kinds on truth
values is inadequate, so that english words and phrases are generally
used for expressing these dependences in texts that describe other
dependences symbolically. for example, the function $\vert$x$\vert$ is
usually defined in words. conditional expressions are a device for
expressing the dependence of quantities on propositional quantities. a
conditional expression has the form



\begin{displaymath}(p_1 \rightarrow e_1,\cdots,p_n \rightarrow
e_n)\end{displaymath}


where the $p$'s are propositional expressions and the $e$'s are
expressions of any kind. it may be read, ``if $p_1$ then $e_1$
otherwise if $p_2$ then $e_2$, $\cdots$ , otherwise if $p_n$ then
$e_n$,'' or ``$p_1$ yields $e_1, \cdots , p_n$ yields $e_n$.'' 3

we now give the rules for determining whether the value of

\begin{displaymath}(p_1 \rightarrow e_1,\cdots,p_n \rightarrow
e_n)\end{displaymath}

is defined, and if so what its value is. examine the $p$'s from left
to right. if a $p$ whose value is $t$ is encountered before any p
whose value is undefined is encountered then the value of the
conditional expression is the value of the corresponding $e$ (if this
is defined). if any undefined $p$ is encountered before a true $p$, or
if all $p$'s are false, or if the $e$ corresponding to the first true
$p$ is undefined, then the value of the conditional expression is
undefined. we now give examples.


\begin{displaymath}(1 < 2 \rightarrow 4, 1 > 2 \rightarrow 3) =
4\end{displaymath}



\begin{displaymath}(2 < 1 \rightarrow 4, 2 > 1 \rightarrow 3, 2 > 1
\rightarrow 2) = 3\end{displaymath}



\begin{displaymath}(2 < 1 \rightarrow 4, t \rightarrow 3) =
3\end{displaymath}



\begin{displaymath}(2 < 1 \rightarrow {0 \over 0}, t \rightarrow 3) =
3\end{displaymath}



\begin{displaymath}(2 < 1 \rightarrow 3, t \rightarrow {0 \over 0}
)\mbox{ is undefined}\end{displaymath}



\begin{displaymath}(2 < 1 \rightarrow 3, 4 < 1 \rightarrow 4) \mbox{
is undefined}\end{displaymath}

some of the simplest applications of conditional expressions are in
giving such definitions as



\begin{displaymath}\vert x\vert = (x < 0 \rightarrow - x, t
\rightarrow x)\end{displaymath}



\begin{displaymath}\delta_{ij} = (i = j \rightarrow 1, t \rightarrow
0)\end{displaymath}



\begin{displaymath}sgn(x) = (x < 0 \rightarrow - 1, x = 0 \rightarrow
0, t \rightarrow 1)\end{displaymath}


d. recursive function definitions. by using conditional expressions we
can, without circularity, define functions by formulas in which the
defined function occurs. for example, we write



\begin{displaymath}n! = (n = 0 \rightarrow 1, t \rightarrow n \cdot(n
- 1)!)\end{displaymath}

when we use this formula to evaluate 0! we get the answer 1; because
of the way in which the value of a conditional expression was defined,
the meaningless expression 0 $\cdot$ (0 - 1)! does not arise. the
evaluation of 2! according to this definition proceeds as follows:
\begin{eqnarray*} 2! &=& (2 = 0 \rightarrow 1, t \rightarrow 2 \cdot
(2 - 1)!)\\...  ...arrow 1, t \rightarrow 0\cdot(0-1)!)\\
&=&2\cdot1\cdot1\\ &=&2 \end{eqnarray*}

we now give two other applications of recursive function
definitions. the greatest common divisor, gcd(m,n), of two positive
integers m and n is computed by means of the euclidean algorithm. this
algorithm is expressed by the recursive function definition:



\begin{displaymath}gcd(m,n) = (m > n \rightarrow gcd(n,m), rem(n,m) =
0 \rightarrow m, t \rightarrow gcd(rem(n,m),m))\end{displaymath}

where $rem(n, m)$ denotes the remainder left when $n$ is divided by
$m$.  the newtonian algorithm for obtaining an approximate square root
of a number $a$, starting with an initial approximation $x$ and
requiring that an acceptable approximation $y$ satisfy $\vert y^2 - a
\vert < \epsilon,$ may be written as


sqrt(a, x, $\epsilon$)



= ($\vert x^2 - a\vert < \epsilon \rightarrow$ x,t $\rightarrow$ sqrt
(a, ${1 \over 2} (x + {a \over x}), \epsilon))$ the simultaneous
recursive definition of several functions is also possible, and we
shall use such definitions if they are required.

there is no guarantee that the computation determined by a recursive
definition will ever terminate and, for example, an attempt to compute
n! from our definition will only succeed if $n$ is a non-negative
integer. if the computation does not terminate, the function must be
regarded as undefined for the given arguments.

the propositional connectives themselves can be defined by conditional
expressions. we write

\begin{eqnarray*} p \wedge q &=& (p \rightarrow q, t \rightarrow f)\\
p \vee q ...  ...htarrow t)\\ p \supset q &=& (p \rightarrow q, t
\rightarrow t) \end{eqnarray*}

it is readily seen that the right-hand sides of the equations have the
correct truth tables. if we consider situations in which $p$ or $q$
may be undefined, the connectives $\wedge$ and $\vee$ are seen to be
noncommutative. for example if $p$ is false and $q$ is undefined, we
see that according to the definitions given above $p \wedge q$ is
false, but $q \wedge p$ is undefined. for our applications this
noncommutativity is desirable, since $p \wedge q$ is computed by first
computing $p$, and if $p$ is false $q$ is not computed. if the
computation for $p$ does not terminate, we never get around to
computing $q$. we shall use propositional connectives in this sense
hereafter.  e. functions and forms. it is usual in
mathematics--outside of mathematical logic--to use the word
``function'' imprecisely and to apply it to forms such as $y^2 +
x$. because we shall later compute with expressions for functions, we
need a distinction between functions and forms and a notation for
expressing this distinction. this distinction and a notation for
describing it, from which we deviate trivially, is given by church
[3].

let $f$ be an expression that stands for a function of two integer
variables. it should make sense to write $f(3, 4)$ and the value of
this expression should be determined. the expression $y^2 + x$ does
not meet this requirement; $y^2 + x(3, 4)$ is not a conventional
notation, and if we attempted to define it we would be uncertain
whether its value would turn out to be 13 or 19. church calls an
expression like $y^2 + x$, a form. a form can be converted into a
function if we can determine the correspondence between the variables
occurring in the form and the ordered list of arguments of the desired
function. this is accomplished by church's $\lambda$-notation.

if $\cal e$ is a form in variables $x_1, \cdots, x_n,$ then
$\lambda((x_1, \cdots, x_n),\cal e)$ will be taken to be the function
of $n$ variables whose value is determined by substituting the
arguments for the variables $x_1, \cdots, x_n$ in that order in $\cal
e$ and evaluating the resulting expression. for example,
$\lambda((x,y),y^2 +x)$ is a function of two variables, and
$\lambda((x,y),y^2 +x)(3,4) = 19$.

the variables occurring in the list of variables of a
$\lambda$-expression are dummy or bound, like variables of integration
in a definite integral. that is, we may change the names of the bound
variables in a function expression without changing the value of the
expression, provided that we make the same change for each occurrence
of the variable and do not make two variables the same that previously
were different. thus $\lambda((x,y),y^2+x),\lambda((u,v), v^2+u)$ and
$\lambda((y,x),x^2+y)$ denote the same function.

we shall frequently use expressions in which some of the variables are
bound by $\lambda$'s and others are not. such an expression may be
regarded as defining a function with parameters. the unbound variables
are called free variables.

an adequate notation that distinguishes functions from forms allows an
unambiguous treatment of functions of functions. it would involve too
much of a digression to give examples here, but we shall use functions
with functions as arguments later in this report.

difficulties arise in combining functions described by
$\lambda$-expressions, or by any other notation involving variables,
because different bound variables may be represented by the same
symbol. this is called collision of bound variables. there is a
notation involving operators that are called combinators for combining
functions without the use of variables. unfortunately, the combinatory
expressions for interesting combinations of functions tend to be
lengthy and unreadable.  f. expressions for recursive functions. the
$\lambda$-notation is inadequate for naming functions defined
recursively. for example, using $\lambda$'s, we can convert the
definition



\begin{displaymath}{\rm sqrt}(a,x,\epsilon) = (\vert x^2 - a\vert <
\epsilon \r...  ...ightarrow {\rm sqrt}(a, {1 \over 2}(x + {a \over
x}),\epsilon))\end{displaymath}

into



\begin{displaymath}{\rm sqrt} = \lambda((a,x,\epsilon),(\vert x^2 -
a\vert < \ep...  ...tarrow {\rm sqrt} (a,{1 \over 2}(x + {a \over x}),
\epsilon))),\end{displaymath}

but the right-hand side cannot serve as an expression for the function
because there would be nothing to indicate that the reference to
$sqrt$ within the expression stood for the expression as a whole.  in
order to be able to write expressions for recursive functions, we
introduce another notation.  $label(a,\cal e)$ denotes the expression
$\cal e$, provided that occurrences of $a$ within $\cal e$ are to be
interpreted as referring to the expression as a whole. thus we can
write

label(sqrt, $\lambda((a,x,\epsilon),(\vert x^2 - a\vert < \epsilon
\rightarrow x, t \rightarrow {\rm sqrt} (a, {1 \over 2}(x + {a \over
x}),\epsilon))))$

as a name for our sqrt function.  the symbol $a$ in label ($a,\cal e$)
is also bound, that is, it may be altered systematically without
changing the meaning of the expression. it behaves differently from a
variable bound by a $\lambda$, however.
